PATENT ID: AU2015101792A4
TITLE: Engineering of systems, methods and optimized enzyme and guide scaffolds for …
DOMAIN: biotechnology
INVENTOR: Fei RAN
ASSIGNEE: Massachusetts Institute Of Technology
FILING DATE: 2015-12-14

=== ABSTRACT ===
The invention provides for systems, methods, and compositions for altering expression of target gene sequences and related gene products. Provided are structural information on the Cas protein of the CRISPR-Cas system, use of this information in generating modified components of the CRISPR complex, vectors and vector systems which encode one or more components or modified components of a CRISPR complex, as well as methods for the design and use of such vectors and components. Also provided are methods of directing CRISPR complex formation in eukaryotic cells and methods for utilizing the CRISPR-Cas system. In particular the present invention comprehends optimized functional CRISPR-Cas enzyme systems. In particular the present invention comprehends engineered new guide architectures to be used in optimized Staphylococcus aureus CRISPR-Cas enzyme systems.

=== CLAIMS ===
  1. A non-naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas system guide RNA (sgRNA), capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a CRISPR enzyme comprising a CRISPR enzyme, or a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a CRISPR-Cas system comprising said guide RNA or optionally sgRNA, the guide RNA or optionally sgRNA comprising a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to a target sequence in a genomic locus of interest in a cell wherein architecture of the sgRNA is modified, wherein the sgRNA is a Sa sgRNA and the CRISPR enzyme is a SaCas9.
  2. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the tetraloop as indicated by region (5) of , with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  3. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the stem loop 1 region (regions (7) and (8) of ) wherein the bases in the stem section (region (7) of ) may be changed wherein structure is kept the same, with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  4. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the stem loop 2 region (regions (10) and (11) of ) wherein the bases in the stem section (region (10) of ) may be changed wherein the structure is kept the same, with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  5. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the 3' end of the Sa sgRNA (region (12) of ), with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  6. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture does not change the G:C pair (region (1) of ) at position +1, with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  7. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 1, wherein the modification of architecture does not change the location of the bulge or bulge duplex (region (3) of ), with respect to the position numbering of +83 Sa sgRNA architecture.
  8. The Sa sgRNA or composition of any preceding claim, wherein at least one region of the Sa sgRNA is further modified by the insertion of distinct RNA sequence(s) that bind to one or more adaptor proteins, and wherein the adaptor protein is associated with one or more functional domains.
  9. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 8, wherein the insertion of distinct RNA sequence(s) that bind to one or more adaptor proteins is an aptamer sequence or two or more aptamer sequences specific to the same or different adaptor protein(s).
  10. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 9, wherein the adaptor protein comprises MS2, PP7, Q3, F2, GA, fr, JP501, M12, R17, BZ13, JP34, JP500, KUl, MI1, MX1, TW18, VK, SP, Fl, ID2, NL95, TW19, AP205, #Cb5, #Cb8r, #Cbl2r, #Cb23r, 7s, PRR1.
  11. The Sa sgRNA or composition of any of claims 8 to 10, wherein the functional domain is a transcriptional activation domain, a transcriptional repressor domain or comprises a nuclease domain.
  13. A non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising the Sa sgRNA according to any preceding claim and a CRISPR enzyme.
  14. The composition of claim 13, wherein the CRISPR enzyme is Sa Cas9.
  15. The composition of any of claims 13-14, wherein the CRISPR enzyme is associated with one or more functional domains.
  16. The composition of claim 15, wherein the functional domain associated with the CRISPR enzyme is a transcriptional activation domain, a transcriptional repressor domain or comprises a nuclease domain.
  17. The Sa sgRNA or composition of any of claims 1-16, wherein the cell is a eukaryotic cell.
  18. The Sa sgRNA or composition of claim 17, wherein the eukaryotic cell is a mammalian cell.
  19. The guide RNA or optionally sgRNA or composition of claim 20, wherein the mammalian cell is a human cell or a mouse cell.
  20. A polynucleotide encoding the Sa sgRNA of any preceding claim.
  21. A vector comprising the polynucleotide according to claim 20 operably linked to a suitable promoter.
  22. A vector according to claim 21, also comprising a further polynucleotide encoding a CRISPR enzyme, optionally a Cas9 as defined in any of claim 14-16.
  23. A vector system, comprising one vector according to claim 21 and a second vector comprising a polynucleotide encoding a CRISPR enzyme, optionally a Cas9 as defined in any of claim 14-16.
  24. A transformant organism or model transformed with any one of the vectors of any of claims 22 to 23 to thereby express the Sa sgRNA and, optionally, the CRISPR enzyme.
  25. A method of modifying a genomic locus of interest to alter gene expression in a cell by introducing into the cell the Sa sgRNA or composition, polynucleotide or vectors of any of claims 1-23.

=== DESCRIPTION ===
ENGINEERING OF SYSTEMS, METHODS AND OPTIMIZED ENZYME AND GUIDE SCAFFOLDS FOR SEQUENCE MANIPULATION PRIORITY CLAIM FIELD OF THE INVENTION The present invention generally relates to systems, methods and compositions used for the control of gene expression involving sequence targeting, such as genome perturbation or gene-editing, that may use vector systems related to Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) and components thereof. In particular the present invention comprehends engineered new guide and enzyme architectures to be used in optimized CRISPR Cas enzyme systems with reference to Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 enzyme (SaCas9) systems. STATEMENT AS TO FEDERALLY SPONSORED RESEARCH This invention was made with government support under NIH Pioneer Award DP1MH100706, awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The government has certain rights in the invention. BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION Recent advances in genome sequencing techniques and analysis methods have significantly accelerated the ability to catalog and map genetic factors associated with a diverse range of biological functions and diseases. Precise genome targeting technologies are needed to enable systematic reverse engineering of causal genetic variations by allowing selective perturbation of individual genetic elements, as well as to advance synthetic biology, biotechnological, and medical applications. Although genome-editing techniques such as designer zinc fingers, transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs), or homing meganucleases are available for producing targeted genome perturbations, there remains a need for new genome engineering technologies that are affordable, easy to set up, scalable, and amenable to targeting multiple positions within the eukaryotic genome.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION There exists a pressing need for alternative and robust systems and techniques for sequence targeting with a wide array of applications. This invention addresses this need and provides related advantages. The CRISPR/Cas or the CRISPR-Cas system (both terms are used interchangeably throughout this application) does not require the generation of customized proteins to target specific sequences but rather a single Cas enzyme can be programmed by a short RNA molecule to recognize a specific DNA target, in other words the Cas enzyme can be recruited to a specific DNA target using said short RNA molecule. Adding the CRISPR-Cas system to the repertoire of genome sequencing techniques and analysis methods may significantly simplify the methodology and accelerate the ability to catalog and map genetic factors associated with a diverse range of biological functions and diseases. To utilize the CRISPR-Cas system effectively for genome editing without deleterious effects, it is critical to understand aspects of engineering and optimization of these genome engineering tools, which are aspects of the claimed invention. In a first aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas system guide RNA or chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a CRISPR enzyme comprising a CRISPR enzyme, or a non naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a CRISPR-Cas system comprising said guide RNA or optionally sgRNA, the guide RNA or optionally sgRNA comprising a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to a target sequence in a genomic locus of interest in a cell wherein architecture of the guide RNA or optionally sgRNA is modified. The invention particularly provides for a non-naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas system comprising a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 enzyme (SaCas9) and the corresponding Staphylococcus aureus guide RNA (Sa sgRNA). In an aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a Sa guide RNA (e.g. sgRNA) comprising a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to a target sequence in a genomic locus of interest in a cell wherein architecture of the Sa sgRNA is modified. In a preferred embodiment, when modifying the architecture of the Sa sgRNA, the location of the bulge or bulge duplex (indicated as region (3) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture) between the proximal direct repeat: anti repeat (DR:ar) (indicated as region (2) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture) and the distal DR:ar (indicated as region (4) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture), is not changed. In some embodiments, the sequence of the bulge or the bulge duplex may be changed as long as the position of the bulge or the bulge duplex is not changed. In a preferred embodiment, when modifying the architecture of the Sa sgRNA, the G:C (indicated as region (1) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture) at position +1 adjacent to the guide sequence is not changed. In a preferred embodiment, when modifying the architecture of the Sa sgRNA, linker 2 (indicated as region (9) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture) is only modified to the extent that the functionality of the CRISPR-Cas system is maintained as linker 2 is functionally important. In a preferred embodiment, when modifying the architecture of the Sa sgRNA, the "GUUUU" in the proximal region of the direct repeat (indicated as region (2) in with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture) may be modified to "GYYYY" where Y is a pyrimidine. In some embodiments the "GUUUU" is modified to "GTTTT" in the direct repeat in the 5' to 3' direction which may hybridize to "CAAAA" in anti repeat in the 3' to 5' direction. In some embodiments the "GUUUU" is modified to "GCCCC" in the direct repeat in the 5' to 3' direction which may hybridize to "CGGGG" in anti repeat in the 3' to 5' direction. In some embodiments, the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the tetraloop (indicated as region (5) in , with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture). In some embodiments, the modification of architecture is adding sequences to stem loop 1 region (indicated as regions (7) and (8) in , with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture). In a preferred embodiment the particular bases in region (7) may be changed but the structure of the region is kept the same. In some embodiments, the modification of architecture is adding sequences to stem loop 2 region (indicated as regions (10) and (11) in , with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture). In a preferred embodiment the particular bases in region (10) may be changed but the structure of the region is kept the same. In some embodiments, the modification of architecture is adding sequences to the 3' end of the sgRNA (indicated as region (12) in , with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture). In some embodiments, at least one of the tetraloop region (region (5) of ), part of the stem loop 1 region (in particular, region (8) of ), part of the stem loop 2 region (in particular, region (11) of ) and the 3' end of the Sa sgRNA (region (12) of ), all with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture, is/are further modified by the insertion of distinct RNA sequence(s) that bind to one or more adaptor proteins, and wherein the adaptor protein is associated with one or more functional domains. In some embodiments, at least one, two, three or all four of the tetraloop region (region (5) of ), part of the stem loop 1 region (in particular, region (8) of ), part of the stem loop 2 region (in particular, region (11) of ) and the 3' end of the Sa sgRNA (region (12) of ), all with respect to the position numbering of the optimized +83 Sa sgRNA architecture, is/are further modified by the insertion of distinct RNA sequence(s) that bind to one or more adaptor proteins, and wherein the adaptor protein is associated with one or more functional domains. In some embodiments, the insertion of distinct RNA sequence(s) that bind to one or more adaptor proteins is an aptamer sequence or two or more aptamer sequences specific to the same or different adaptor protein(s). In some embodiments, the adaptor protein comprises MS2, PP7, Q3, F2, GA, fr, JP501, M12, R17, BZ13, JP34, JP500, KU1, M11, MX1, TW18, VK, SP, Fl, ID2, NL95, TW19, AP205, #Cb5, #Cb8r, #Cbl2r, #Cb23r, 7s, PRR1. In some embodiments, the functional domain is a transcriptional activation domain, a transcriptional repressor domain or comprises a nuclease domain. In an aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a CRISPR-Cas system comprising a SaCas9 enzyme wherein architecture of the SaCas9 enzyme is modified. In a preferred embodiment the SaCas9 enzyme is modified based on structural and mutational analysis. In a more preferred embodiment the structural analysis is based on the crystal structure of the SaCas9 in complex with the Sa sgRNA and its target DNA or sequence. In an aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a SaCas9 enzyme, wherein the SaCas9 enzyme is modified at regions that do not overlap with corresponding conserved regions of the ortholog Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 enzyme (SpCas9). Structural features of SpCas9 which may be amenable to modification (for example, to modify or abolish nuclease activity or to truncate the enzyme while retaining nuclease activity) have been further described in PCT/US14/69925, titled "CRISPR CAS SYSTEMS, CRYSTAL STRUCTURE AND USES THEREOF" filed on December 12, 2014 and its priority documents, all the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety. By aligning SaCas9 and SpCas9 enzymes as indicated in , the structural features of SaCas9 which correspond to the structural features of SpCas9 may be determined and specific regions may be modified to arrive at SaCas9 modified enzymes with varied functions. In some embodiments, the SaCas9 enzyme is associated with one or more functional domains. In some embodiments, the functional domain associated with the SaCas9 enzyme is a transcriptional activation domain, a transcriptional repressor domain or comprises a nuclease domain. In some embodiments, the cell is a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the eukaryotic cell is a mammalian cell. In some embodiments, the mammalian cell is a human cell or a mouse cell. In an aspect, the invention provides a polynucleotide encoding the present guide (e.g. a Sa sgRNA or a modified Sa sgRNA). In an aspect, the invention provides a vector comprising the polynucleotide operably linked to a suitable promoter. In some embodiments, the vector also comprises a further polynucleotide encoding a Sa Cas9 enzyme. In an aspect, the invention provides a vector system, comprising one of the present vectors and a second vector comprising a polynucleotide encoding a Sa Cas9 enzyme. In an aspect, the invention provides a transformant organism or model transformed with any one of the vectors to thereby express the Sa sgRNA or a modified Sa sgRNA and, optionally, the CRISPR enzyme, preferably a SaCas9 enzyme.
 In an aspect, the invention provides a method of modifying a genomic locus of interest to alter gene expression in a cell by introducing into the cell the composition, polynucleotide or vectors described herein. In some embodiments, the guide RNA or optionally Sa sgRNA comprises, in a tandem arrangement: I. a guide sequence or a truncated guide sequence (TRU guides), which is capable of hybridizing to a sequence of the target nucleic acid to bind to the target nucleic acid or to further manipulate it; II. a tracr mate sequence, comprising a region of sense sequence; III. a linker sequence; and IV. a tracr sequence, comprising a region of antisense sequence which is positioned adjacent the linker sequence and which is capable of hybridizing with the region of sense sequence thereby forming a secondary structure or a stem loop. The invention, in its various aspects as described herein, is based on a number of surprising discoveries in relation to RNA components of CRISPR-Cas systems comprising a SaCas9 enzyme. In an aspect the invention provides a composition as herein discussed which is a non naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas system dual guide RNA molecule (dgRNA, optionally a Sa dgRNA) capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a CRISPR enzyme comprising a SaCas9, as described in PCT/US 14/70152 titled "ENGINEERING OF SYSTEMS, METHODS AND OPTIMIZED GUIDE COMPOSITIONS WITH NEW ARCHITECTURES FOR SEQUENCE MANIPULATION" filed on December 12, 2014, the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety. In an aspect the invention also provides a composition as herein discussed which is a non-naturally occurring or engineered Sa sgRNA capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a SaCas9 enzyme; the Sa sgRNA comprising, in a tandem arrangement: I. a guide sequence or a truncated guide sequence, which is capable of hybridizing to a sequence of the target nucleic acid to be manipulated; II. a tracr mate sequence, comprising a region of sense sequence; III. a linker sequence; and IV. a tracr sequence, comprising a region of antisense sequence which is positioned adjacent the linker sequence and which is capable of hybridizing with the region of sense sequence thereby forming a stem loop; wherein the guide sequence comprises a length of 21 or more nucleotides or wherein the truncated guide sequence comprises a length of 20 or less nucleotides. When said sgRNA molecule is present within the cell, the region of antisense sequence is hybridized to the region of sense sequence thereby forming the stem loop; and wherein when said sgRNA molecule binds within the cell to the CRISPR enzyme so forming a CRISPR-Cas complex, the guide sequence hybridizes to a sequence of the target nucleic acid thereby directing sequence-specific binding of the CRISPR/Cas complex to the target nucleic acid, whereupon said sequence of said target nucleic acid is manipulated by the CRISPR enzyme of the complex. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein, the tracr sequence further comprises at least two regions of secondary structure, preferably at least two stem loops. The tracr sequence may further comprises two or more regions of secondary structure, preferably stem loops. The tracr sequence may further comprise 3 stem loops or more than 3 stem loops, 4 stem loops or more than 4 stem loops, 5 stem loops or more than 5 stem loops. In preferred embodiments of the invention the optimized Sa sgRNA has a tetraloop and two stem loops, wherein the stem loop 1 region of the herein described Sa sgRNA may correlate to the identified stem loop 2 in the orthologous Sp sgRNA and the stem loop 2 region of there herein described Sa sgRNA may correlate to the identified stem loop 3 in the orthologous Sp sgRNA. Aspects of the structure and function of Sp Cas9, which may be correlated to the structure and function of Sa Cas9 and the Sa sgRNA CRISPR enzyme complex, to further describe embodiments of the invention, are described in PCT/US14/69925, titled "CRISPR-CAS SYSTEMS, CRYSTAL STRUCTURE AND USES THEREOF" filed on December 12, 2014 and its priority documents, all the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety. Aspects of modifications to a Sa sgRNA may also be described in terms of a +85 architecture. Specific modifications to a +85 Sa sgRNA are further described in . Aspects of the invention also encompass modifications made to Sa sgRNAs based on analogy to structure and that correspond to modifications made to the ortholog Sp sgRNA (modifications to Sp sgRNA are further indicated in and 3). In any of the dgRNAs described herein, the tandem arrangement of the guide sequence and tracr mate sequence can be in a 5' to 3' orientation, or in a 3' to 5' orientation. In the sgRNAs described herein, the tandem arrangement of the guide sequence, tracr mate sequence, linker sequence and tracr sequence can be in a 5' to 3' orientation, or in a 3' to 5' orientation. A 5' to 3' orientation is preferred in each case. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein, the guide sequence comprises a length of 22 or more nucleotides, 23 or more nucleotides, or 24 or more nucleotides; preferably the guide sequence comprises a length of 21, 22, 23 or 24 nucleotides. In all of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein, the guide sequence may consist of a length of 21, 22, 23 or 24 nucleotides. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein, if the guide sequence is truncated, the truncated guide sequence may consist of a length of 20, 19, 18 or 17 mucleotides. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein the terminal 5' or 3' nucleotide of the guide sequence may be a guanine nucleotide, or a functional equivalent thereof. E.g., referring to the positional numbering as depicted at Figure 4, in such embodiments the nucleotide at position -21 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -22 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -23 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -24 of the sgRNA is G. In any of the sgRNAs described herein, the linker sequence may commence after position +36 or less of the sense sequence; after position +25 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +21 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +18 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +15 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +14 or less of the sense sequence (see Figure 4 for numbering indications for a FL sgRNA). In any of the dgRNAs described herein, the sequence of the tracr mate has a length of 36 nucleotides or less, or has a length of 25 nucleotides or less, or has a length of 21 nucleotides or less, or has a length of 18 nucleotides or less, or has a length of 15 nucleotides or less, or has a length of 14 nucleotides or less. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein the tracr sequence may be 50 or more nucleotides in length, 55 or more nucleotides in length, 60 or more nucleotides in length, 65 or more nucleotides in length, 70 or more nucleotides in length, 75 or more nucleotides in length, 80 or more nucleotides in length, 85 or more nucleotides in length, 90 or more nucleotides in length, 95 or more nucleotides in length, or 100 or more nucleotides in length.
 In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein the 5' or 3' terminal end of the tracr sequence opposite the region of antisense sequence comprises a poly uracil (U) tract, preferably wherein the poly U tract comprises 5 or more U nucleotides, optionally wherein the poly U tract consists of 5 U nucleotides, preferably wherein the poly U tract consists of 6 U nucleotides or consists of 7 U nucleotides. In any of the dgRNAs or sgRNAs described herein when complexed with the CRISPR enzyme within the cell the guide sequence is capable of hybridizing to a target nucleic acid associated with a PAM sequence comprising NNGRRN or NNGRRT. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed provides DNA polynucleotide molecule(s) encoding: a. any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein; b. any tracr RNA according as described herein; or c. both any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA as described herein. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed provides a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein, or a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein, or a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein; wherein each expression vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding said RNAs and capable of directing expression of the RNAs within the cell. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any sgRNA as described herein, wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the sgRNA and capable of directing expression of the sgRNA within the cell. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides a delivery vector carrying: a. any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein; b. any tracr RNA according as described herein; or c. both any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA as described herein. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides a delivery vector carrying any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) described herein. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides delivery vector carrying: a. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein; b. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein; or c. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and additionally comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed also provides a delivery vector carrying a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any sgRNA as described herein, wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the sgRNA and capable of directing expression of the sgRNA within the cell. Any such delivery vectors described above may further carry the CRISPR enzyme; or may further carry an RNA molecule encoding the CRISPR enzyme and which is capable of expressing the enzyme. Alternatively, any such delivery vectors may further carry a DNA expression vector which comprises a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding the CRISPR enzyme, and which further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression of the enzyme within the cell. The enzyme and components of the sgRNA or dgRNA may be carried on the same or different vectors. Any delivery vector carrying any of the components described herein may comprise liposomes, particles, e.g., nanoparticles, exosomes or microvesicles. Alternatively, any delivery vector carrying any of the components described herein may comprise a viral vector which is a retroviral vector, optionally a lentiviral vector, a baculoviral vector, a herpes simplex virus vector, an adenoviral vector, an adenoassociated viral (AAV) vector such as AAV8 vector, or a poxvirus such as a vaccinia virus. In an aspect, the invention provides a method as herein discussed wherein the method is a method of modifying a cell of a prokaryotic or eukaryotic organism by manipulating a sequence of at least one target nucleic acid within the cell, the method comprising introducing into the cell a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising: a. polynucleotide sequences comprising: i. any a dual guide RNA molecule (dgRNA) as described herein; ii. DNA expression vectors, comprising DNA polynucleotide molecules encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA according as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the RNAs and capable of directing expression of the RNAs within the cell; iii. a single DNA expression vector, comprising both DNA polynucleotide molecules encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA according as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the RNAs and capable of directing expression of the RNAs within the cell; iv. any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein, or v. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide encoding any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the sgRNA and capable of directing expression of the sgRNA within the cell; and b. a CRISPR enzyme comprising a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 enzyme (SaCas9), or a polynucleotide encoding the enzyme and which further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression of the enzyme within the cell; wherein within the cell: i. the region of antisense sequence of the tracr sequence hybridizes with the sense sequence of the tracr mate sequence; ii. the CRISPR enzyme forms a CRISPR/Cas complex with the sgRNA or with the dgRNA; and iii. the guide sequence hybridizes to a sequence of the at least one target nucleic acid, thereby directing sequence-specific binding of the CRISPR enzyme to the at least one sequence of the target nucleic acid, whereupon the CRISPR enzyme effects the manipulation of the target sequence. In an aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR Cas programmable genome editing system or CRISPR-Cas composition as herein discussed comprising: a. polynucleotide sequences comprising: i. any a dual guide RNA molecule (dgRNA) as described herein; ii. DNA expression vectors, comprising DNA polynucleotide molecules encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA according as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the RNAs and capable of directing expression of the RNAs within the cell; iii. a single DNA expression vector, comprising both DNA polynucleotide molecules encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and any tracr RNA according as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the RNAs and capable of directing expression of the RNAs within the cell; iv. any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein, or v. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide encoding any CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the sgRNA and capable of directing expression of the sgRNA within the cell; and b. a CRISPR enzyme comprising a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 enzyme (SaCas9), or a polynucleotide encoding the enzyme and which further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression of the enzyme within the cell; wherein within the cell following introduction of said commposition: i. the region of antisense sequence of the tracr sequence hybridizes with the sense sequence of the tracr mate sequence; ii. the CRISPR enzyme forms a CRISPR/Cas complex with the sgRNA or with the dgRNA; and iii. the guide sequence hybridizes to a sequence of the at least one target nucleic acid, thereby directing sequence-specific binding of the CRISPR enzyme to the at least one sequence of the target nucleic acid, whereupon the CRISPR enzyme effects the manipulation of said sequence. In an aspect, the invention as herein discussed provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas complex comprising: a. a CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein; or a dual guide RNA molecule (dgRNA) as described herein; and b. a CRISPR enzyme comprising a SaCas9 enzyme; wherein within the cell: i. the region of antisense sequence of the tracr sequence hybridizes with the sense sequence of the tracr mate sequence,; ii. the CRISPR enzyme forms a CRISPR/Cas complex with the sgRNA or with the dgRNA; and iii. the guide sequence is capable of hybridizing to a sequence of the at least one target nucleic acid to direct sequence-specific binding of the CRISPR/Cas complex to a sequence of the target nucleic acid, whereupon the CRISPR enzyme is capable of effecting the manipulation of said sequence. In the methods or compositions described herein the CRISPR enzyme of the composition may be provided as a polynucleotide sequence which comprises either (a) RNA, which is capable of expressing the enzyme or (b) DNA, wherein the polynucleotide sequence is operably linked to one or more regulatory element(s) capable of directing expression of RNA encoding the CRISPR enzyme. In such methods or compositions comprising a sgRNA, in the composition the sgRNA is provided via a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding a CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) as described herein, wherein the vector further comprises one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to sequences encoding the sgRNA and capable of directing expression of the sgRNA within the cell; and wherein in the composition the enzyme is provided via a DNA expression vector further comprising one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to polynucleotide sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression thereof; wherein polynucleotides encoding sgRNA and enzyme are provided on the same or different DNA expression vectors, preferably on the same DNA expression vector. In such methods or compositions comprising a dgRNA, in the composition the dgRNA is provided via: a. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein; and a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein; or b. a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any chimeric RNA molecule as described herein and additionally comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding any tracr RNA according as described herein; wherein in the composition the enzyme is provided via DNA polynucleotide sequences further comprising one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to polynucleotide sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression thereof; wherein polynucleotides encoding the enzyme are provided on one of said DNA expression vectors as defined in (a) or (b) above, or wherein polynucleotides encoding the enzyme are provided on a different DNA expression vector. In such methods or compositions the polynucleotide sequences encoding the chimeric RNA molecule of the dgRNA, the tracr RNA molecule of the dgRNA and the CRISPR enzyme are all provided on the same DNA expression vector. In such methods or compositions: a. polynucleotides comprising or encoding sgRNA, or a DNA expression vector encoding and capable of expressing the same; or b. polynucleotides comprising or encoding the chimeric RNA molecule of the dgRNA, or a DNA expression vector encoding and capable of expressing the same; and polynucleotides comprising or encoding the tracr RNA molecule of the dgRNA, or a DNA expression vector comprising a DNA polynucleotide molecule encoding and capable of expressing the same; and i. the CRISPR enzyme, or ii. a DNA expression vector comprising polynucleotides encoding the enzyme and further comprising one or more regulatory element(s) operably linked to polynucleotide sequences encoding the enzyme and capable of directing expression thereof may be comprised in one or more delivery vectors. In such methods or compositions: a. the polynucleotides comprising or encoding sgRNA or comprising or encoding components of dgRNA or the DNA expression vectors encoding sgRNA or encoding components of dgRNA; and b. the CRISPR enzyme or the DNA expression vector comprising polynucleotides encoding the enzyme; are comprised in the same delivery vector or in two or more different delivery vectors. In such methods or compositions the one or more or two or more delivery vectors is a recombinant virus. The recombinant virus may be a retrovirus, optionally a lentivirus, a baculovirus, a herpes simplex virus, an adenovirus, an adenoassociated virus (AAV) such as AAV8, or a poxvirus such as a vaccinia virus. In such methods or compositions the one or more or two or more delivery vectors comprise(s) liposomes, particles, e.g., nanoparticles, exosomes or microvesicles. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the CRISPR enzyme may further comprise one or more nuclear localization sequences (NLSs) capable of driving the accumulation of the CRISPR enzyme to a detectible amount in the nucleus of the cell of the organism. The CRISPR enzyme may comprise two or more NLSs, three or more NLSs, four or more NLSs, five or more NLSs, six or more NLSs, seven or more NLSs, eight or more NLSs, nine or more NLSs, or ten or more NLSs. The CRISPR enzyme may comprise at least one NLS at or near the amino-terminus of the CRISPR enzyme and/or at least one NLS at or near the carboxy-terminus of the CRISPR enzyme. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein said manipulation of the at least one target nucleic acid by the CRISPR-Cas complex comprises cleavage of the at least one target nucleic acid. Cleavage may comprise one or more double strand break(s) introduced into the target nucleic acid, optionally at least two double-strand break(s). Said cleavage may be via one or more single-strand break(s) introduced into the target nucleic acid, optionally at least two single-strand break(s). In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein one or more double-strand break(s) or one or more single-strand break(s) may lead to the formation of one or more insertion and deletion mutations (INDELs) in the target nucleic acid. In any of the methods, systems or compositions described herein involving cleavage, the composition may comprise components of at least two types of Sa CRISPR/Cas complex, wherein each type of complex comprises a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to different sequences of the target nucleic acid. In such methods, systems or compositions said cleavage is cleavage of first and second strands of the target nucleic acid via at least two double-strand breaks introduced into the target nucleic acid; wherein a first double-strand break is introduced at a first position of the target nucleic acid by manipulating a first target sequence and a second double-strand break is introduced at a second position of the target nucleic acid by manipulating a second target sequence; wherein upon introduction of first and second double-strand breaks sequences between first and second double-strand breaks are excised. In any of the methods, systems or compositions described herein involving cleavage, the composition may comprise comprises components of at least four types of Sa CRISPR/Cas complex, wherein each type of complex comprises a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to different sequences of the target DNA.
 In such methods, systems or compositions said cleavage is via at least two pairs of single-strand breaks introduced into the target DNA; wherein to introduce a first pair of single-strand breaks a first single-strand break is introduced into a first strand of DNA by manipulating a first target sequence to create a first nick and a second single-strand break is introduced into the opposite strand of DNA by manipulating a second target sequence to create a second nick; wherein to introduce a second pair of single-strand breaks a third single-strand break is introduced into said first strand of DNA by manipulating a third target sequence to create a third nick and a fourth single-strand break is introduced into said opposite strand of DNA by manipulating a fourth target sequence to create a fourth nick; wherein upon introduction of first and second pairs of single-strand breaks target sequences between first and second pairs of single-strand breaks are excised. First and second nicks may be offset relative to each other by at least one base pair so creating a first overhang, and wherein third and fourth nicks are offset relative to each other by at least one base pair so creating a second overhang. Following excision upon cleavage the ends of the cleaved first strand of DNA may be ligated together and the ends of the cleaved second strand of DNA may be ligated together thus reforming unbroken first and second strands. In methods, systems or compositions described herein, said manipulation may comprise insertion of one or more nucleotides into or adjacent target sequences, deletion of one or more nucleotides in or adjacent target sequences, translocation of target sequences, repression of transcription of target gene sequences or and/or repression or inactivation of target sequences. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the enzyme comprising a SaCas9 enzyme, may be a fragment or derivative of SaCas9, or may comprise one or more amino acid substitutions compared to the wild-type SaCas9. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the SaCas9 may be a modified SaCas9 enzyme. Modifications to the SaCas9 enzyme may be made at corresponding positions to its ortholog SpCas9 enzyme. Modifications may be made at regions which are not conserved between the SaCas9 enzyme and the SpCas9 enzyme, as indicated by an alignment of both enzymes (see alignment of SpCas9 and SaCas9 enzymes in ). The SaCas9 enzyme may comprise one or more substitution(s) leading to catalytic inactivation of the HNH nuclease domain and/or the RuvC nuclease domain of SaCas9. The substitution may be at position N580 of SaCas9, preferably a N580A substitution. In the dgRNA, sgRNA, DNA polynucleotide molecule, DNA expression vector, delivery vector, method, system, composition or complex described herein, the SaCas9 enzyme may comprise one or more mutations at positions which correspond to positions D10, E762, H840, N854, N863, or D986 of the orthologous wild-type SpCas9 enzyme. The SaCas9 enzyme may further comprise a substitution at position N580 of SaCas9, preferably a N580A substitution. The SaCas9 enzyme may further comprise a substitution at position N580 of SaCas9, preferably a N580A substitution, and a substitution at position D10 of SaCas9 preferably a D10A substitution. Preferably the SaCas9 may comprise a N580A substitution and a D10A substitution. With respect to mutations of the CRISPR enzyme, when the enzyme is not SpCas9, mutations may be made at any or all residues corresponding to positions 10, 762, 840, 854, 863 and/or 986 of SpCas9 (which may be ascertained for instance by standard sequence comparison tools). In particular, any or all of the following mutations are preferred in SpCas9: D10A, E762A, H840A, N854A, N863A and/or D986A; as well as conservative substitution for any of the replacement amino acids is also envisaged. In an aspect the invention provides as to any or each or all embodiments herein-discussed wherein the CRISPR enzyme comprises at least one or more, or at least two or more mutations, wherein the at least one or more mutation or the at least two or more mutations is as to D10, E762, H840, N854, N863, or D986 according to SpCas9 protein, e.g., D10A, E762A, H840A, N854A, N863A and/or D986A as to SpCas9, or N580 according to SaCas9, e.g., N580A as to SaCas9, or any corresponding mutation(s) in a Cas9 of an ortholog to Sp or Sa, or the CRISPR enzyme comprises at least one mutation wherein at least H840 or N863A as to Sp Cas9 or N580A as to Sa Cas9 is mutated; e.g., wherein the CRISPR enzyme comprises H840A, or D10A and H840A, or D10A and N863A, according to SpCas9 protein, or any corresponding mutation(s) in a Cas9 of an ortholog to Sp protein or Sa protein.
 In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the SaCas9 may be fused to one or more transcriptional repressor domains, optionally wherein the one or more transcriptional repressor domains comprises KRAB, SID and/or SID4X or any one or more transcriptional repressor domains described herein. The or more transcriptional repressor domain may comprise a NuE domain or a NcoR domain. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the SaCas9 may be fused to one or more transcriptional activation domains such as VP64 or any one or more transcriptional activation domains described herein. The transcriptional activation domain associated with the CRISPR enzyme may be a transcriptional activation domain which comprises p65, MyoD1, HSF1, RTA and SET7/9. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the SaCas9 may be fused to one or more additional nuclease domain(s) capable of cleaving the target nucleic acid, optionally a Fok1 nuclease domain. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein the SaCas9 may be fused to one or more functional domains having activities comprising methylase activity, demethylase activity, transcription activation activity, transcription repression activity, transcription release factor activity, histone modification activity, RNA cleavage activity, DNA cleavage activity, DNA integration activity or nucleic acid binding activity. In any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, methods, systems, compositions or complexes described herein various functional domains may be fused to the SaCas9 enzyme. Histone modifying domains are preferred in some embodiments, fused to the SaCas9 enzyme. Exemplary histone modifying domains are discussed below. Transposase domains, HR (Homologous Recombination) machinery domains, recombinase domains, and/or integrase domains are also preferred as the present functional domains. In some embodiments, DNA integration activity includes HR machinery domains, integrase domains, recombinase domains and/or transposase domains.
 Endogenous transcriptional repression is often mediated by chromatin modifying enzymes such as histone methyltransferases (HMTs) and deacetylases (HDACs). Repressive histone effector domains are known and an exemplary list is provided below. In the exemplary table, preference was given to proteins and functional truncations of small size to facilitate efficient viral packaging (for instance via AAV). In general, however, the domains may include HDACs, histone methyltransferases (HMTs), and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitors, as well as HDAC and HMT recruiting proteins. The functional domain may be or include, in some embodiments, HDAC Effector Domains, HDAC Recruiter Effector Domains, Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Effector Domains, Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Recruiter Effector Domains, or Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitor Effector Domains. The HDAC domain may be any of those in the table herein, namely: HDAC8, RPD3, MesoLo4, HDAC11, HDT1, SIRT3, HST2, CobB, HST2, SIRT5, Sir2A, or SIRT6. The functional domain may be a Methyltransferase (HMT) Effector Domain. Preferred examples include NUE, vSET, EHMT2/G9A, SUV39H1, dim-5, KYP, SUVR4, SET4, SET1, SETD8, and TgSET8. The functional domain may be a Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Recruiter Effector Domain. Preferred examples include Hpla, PHF19, and NIPPl. The functional domain may be a Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitor Effector Domain. Preferred examples include SET/TAF-13. Any of the functional domains described herein can be attached to the SaCas9 CRISPR enzyme via a linker, e.g., a flexible glycine-serine (GlyGlyGlySer) or (GGGS) 3 or a rigid alpha-helical linker such as (Ala(GluAlaAlaAlaLys)Ala). Linkers such as (GGGGS) 3 are preferably used herein to separate protein or peptide domains. (GGGGS) 3 is preferable because it is a relatively long linker (15 amino acids). The glycine residues are the most flexible and the serine residues enhance the chance that the linker is on the outside of the protein. (GGGGS) 6
(GGGGS)
9 or (GGGGS)12 may preferably be used as alternatives. Other preferred alternatives are (GGGGS) 1 , (GGGGS) 2 , (GGGGS) 4 , (GGGGS) 5 , (GGGGS) 7 , (GGGGS) 8 , (GGGGS) 10 , or
(GGGGS)
11 . Alternative linkers are available, but highly flexible linkers are thought to work best to allow for maximum opportunity for the 2 parts of the Cas9 to come together and thus reconstitute Cas9 activity. One alternative is that the NLS of nucleoplasmin can be used as a linker. For example, a linker can also be used between the Cas9 and any functional domain.
Again, a (GGGGS) 3 linker may be used here (or the 6, 9, or 12 repeat versions therefore) or the NLS of nucleoplasmin can be used as a linker between Cas9 and the functional domain. In any of the dgRNA, sgRNA, DNA polynucleotide molecule, DNA expression vector, delivery vector, method, system, composition or complex described herein said manipulation may be performed in vitro or ex vivo. In an aspect, the invention also provides any of the dgRNA, sgRNA, DNA polynucleotide molecule, DNA expression vector, delivery vector, system, composition or complex as described herein for use as a medicament, optionally for use in the treatment of a viral infection. In such cases, treatment is treatment of a mammal, optionally a human. In an aspect, the invention also provides the use of any of the dgRNA, sgRNA, DNA polynucleotide molecule, DNA expression vector, delivery vector, system, composition or complex as described herein in the manufacture of a medicament, optionally for the treatment of a viral infection. In such cases, treatment is treatment of a mammal, optionally a human. In an aspect, the invention also provides pharmaceutical compositions comprising any of the dgRNAs, sgRNAs, DNA polynucleotide molecules, DNA expression vectors, delivery vectors, systems, compositions or complexes described herein. Such pharmaceutical compositions may contain an excipient. Such pharmaceutical compositions may be formulated for administration to a mammal, optionally a human. Certain methods, products and uses described herein may not be applied in situations which result in the destruction of a human embryo and in situations which result in the modification of the germ line genetic identity of humans. Methods, products and uses described herein may be used for non-therapeutic purposes. Furthermore, any of the methods described herein may be applied in vitro and ex vivo. It will be appreciated that the invention described herein involves various components which may display variations in their specific characteristics. It will be appreciated that any combination of features described above and herein, as appropriate, are contemplated as a means for implementing the invention. [00100] In general, applying to any of the aspects discussed herein, the sgRNA is a non naturally occurring or engineered CRISPR-Cas system chimeric single guide RNA molecule. It is preferably capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a CRISPR enzyme. Examples of preferred CRISPR enzymes are an S pyogenes Cas9 and a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 enzyme (SaCas9). The sgRNA may comprise, in some embodiments, the following, in a tandem arrangement: I. a guide sequence, which is capable of hybridizing to a sequence of the target nucleic acid to be manipulated; II. a tracr mate sequence, comprising a region of sense sequence; III. a linker sequence; and IV. a tracr sequence, comprising a region of antisense sequence which is positioned adjacent the linker sequence and which is capable of hybridizing with the region of sense sequence thereby forming a stem loop. [00101] In some aspects, especially those relating to SaCas9, the guide sequence comprises a length of 21 or more nucleotides. [00102] Specifically, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a CRISPR-Cas system comprising a chimeric single guide RNA molecule (sgRNA) capable of effecting the manipulation of a target nucleic acid within a prokaryotic or eukaryotic cell when in complex within the cell with a CRISPR enzyme, the sgRNA comprising a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to a target sequence in a genomic locus of interest in a cell wherein architecture of the sgRNA is modified. Preferred modifcations to the architecture are discussed herein. [00103] Example of a preferred CRISPR enzymes is an SaCas9 enzyme. The Sa sgRNA may comprise, in some embodiments, the following, in a tandem arrangement: I. a guide sequence or a truncated guide sequence (TRU guides), which is capable of hybridizing to a sequence of the target nucleic acid to which it binds or can manipulate; II. a tracr mate sequence, comprising a region of sense sequence; III. a linker sequence; and IV. a tracr sequence, comprising a region of antisense sequence which is positioned adjacent the linker sequence and which is capable of hybridizing with the region of sense sequence thereby forming a stem loop. [00104] In some aspects, especially those relating to SaCas9, the guide sequence comprises a length of 21 or more nucleotides.
[00105] In general, the invention comprehends the sgRNA comprising a guide sequence fused to a tracr sequence. The tracr sequence may further comprise at least two regions of secondary structure, preferably at least two stem loops. When said sgRNA molecule is present within the cell, the region of antisense sequence may be hybridized to the region of sense sequence thereby forming the stem loop; and wherein when said sgRNA molecule binds within the cell to the CRISPR enzyme so forming a CRISPR-Cas complex, the guide sequence hybridizes to a sequence of the target nucleic acid thereby directing sequence-specific binding of the CRISPR/Cas complex to the target nucleic acid, whereupon said sequence of said target nucleic acid is manipulated by the CRISPR enzyme of the complex. [00106] In any of the sgRNAs described herein, and this may apply to any of the present aspects, the terminal 5' or 3' nucleotide of the guide sequence may be a guanine nucleotide, or a functional equivalent thereof. E.g., referring to the positional numbering as depicted at Figure 4, in such embodiments the nucleotide at position -21 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -22 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -23 of the sgRNA is G, or the nucleotide at position -24 of the sgRNA is G. [00107] In any of the sgRNAs described herein, and this may apply to any of the present aspects, the linker sequence may commence after position +36 or less of the sense sequence; after position +25 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +21 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +18 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +15 or less of the sense sequence; or after position +14 or less of the sense sequence (see Figure 4 for numbering indications). It will be appreciated that this numbering may not include the guide sequence. [00108] In any of the sgRNAs described herein, and this may apply to any of the present aspects, the tracr sequence may be 50 or more nucleotides in length, 55 or more nucleotides in length, 60 or more nucleotides in length, 65 or more nucleotides in length, 70 or more nucleotides in length, 75 or more nucleotides in length, 80 or more nucleotides in length, 85 or more nucleotides in length. This numbering does not, of course, include the guide sequence as it relates to the tracr sequence. [00109] In any of the sgRNAs described herein, and this may apply to any of the present aspects, the 5' or 3' terminal end of the tracr sequence opposite the region of antisense sequence comprises a poly uracil (U) tract, preferably wherein the poly U tract comprises 5 or more U nucleotides, optionally wherein the poly U tract consists of 5 U nucleotides, preferably wherein the poly U tract consists of 6 U nucleotides or consists of 7 U nucleotides. [00110] In any of the sgRNAs described herein, and this may apply to any of the present aspects, when complexed with the CRISPR-Cas enzyme within the cell, the guide sequence is capable of hybridizing to a target nucleic acid associated with a PAM sequence comprising NNGRRN or NNGRRT. [00111] In relation to the guides in general, but specifically in respect of the present modified sgRNA and the complex formed therewith, it is preferable that the guide has one or more of the following features. In some embodiments, the tracr sequence has one or more hairpins and is 30 or more nucleotides in length, more preferably 40 or more nucleotides in length, or more preferably 50 or more nucleotides in length. In some embodiments, the guide sequence is between 10 to 30 nucleotides in length. In some embodiments, the CRISPR/Cas enzyme is a Type II Cas9 enzyme. In some embodiments, the tracr sequence has one or more hairpins and is 30 or more nucleotides in length, more preferably 40 or more nucleotides in length, or more preferably 50 or more nucleotides in length, the guide sequence is between 10 to 30 nucleotides in length and the CRISPR/Cas enzyme is a Type II Cas9 enzyme. [00112] The one or more functional domains associated with the CRISPR enzyme or the guide may be a transcriptional activation domain comprises VP64, p65, MyoD1, HSF1, RTA and SET7/9. Other references herein to activation (or activator) domains in respect of those associated with the CRISPR enzyme include any known transcriptional activation domain and specifically VP64, p65, MyoD1, HSF1, RTA or SET7/9. [00113] Preferably, the one or more functional domains (for example associated with the adaptor protein, where present, or the CRISPR enzyme) is a transcriptional repressor domain or a transcriptional repressor domain. [00114] The transcriptional repressor domain may be a KRAB domain, or a NuE domain, NcoR domain, SID domain or a SID4X domain. [00115] The one or more functional domains may have one or more activities comprising methylase activity, demethylase activity, transcription activation activity, transcription repression activity, transcription release factor activity, histone modification activity, RNA cleavage activity, DNA cleavage activity, DNA integration activity or nucleic acid binding activity.
[00116] Histone modifying domains are also preferred in some embodiments. Exemplary histone modifying domains are discussed below. Transposase domains, HR (Homologous Recombination) machinery domains, recombinase domains, and/or integrase domains are also preferred as the present functional domains. In some embodiments, DNA integration activity includes HR machinery domains, integrase domains, recombinase domains and/or transposase domains. [00117] The DNA cleavage activity may be due to a nuclease, which may be a Fok1 nuclease. The one or more functional domains may be attached to the CRISPR enzyme so that upon binding to the sgRNA and target the functional domain is in a spatial orientation allowing for the functional domain to function in its attributed function. [00118] The one or more functional domains may be attached to the CRISPR enzyme via a linker, optionally a GlySer linker. [00119] Endogenous transcriptional repression is often mediated by chromatin modifying enzymes such as histone methyltransferases (HMTs) and deacetylases (HDACs). Repressive histone effector domains are known and an exemplary list is provided below. In the exemplary table, preference was given to proteins and functional truncations of small size to facilitate efficient viral packaging (for instance via AAV). In general, however, the domains may include HDACs, histone methyltransferases (HMTs), and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitors, as well as HDAC and HMT recruiting proteins. The functional domain may be or include, in some embodiments, HDAC Effector Domains, HDAC Recruiter Effector Domains, Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Effector Domains, Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Recruiter Effector Domains, or Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitor Effector Domains. [00120] HDAC Effector Domains Subtype/ Name Substrate Modification Organism Full Selected Final size Catalytic Complex (if known) (if known) size truncation (aa) domain (aa) (aa) HDAC I HDAC8 - - X laevis 325 1-325 325 1-272: HDAC HDAC I RPD3 - - S. cerevisiae 433 19-340 322 19-331: (Vannier) HDAC HDAC IV MesoLo4 - - M. loti 300 1-300 300 (Gregoretti) HDAC IV HDAC11 - - H. sapiens 347 1-347 347 14-326: 1 1_ (Gao) HDAC HD2 HDT1 - - A. thaliana 245 1-211 (Wu) 211 SIRT I SIRT3 H3K9Ac - H. sapiens 399 143-399 257 126-382: H4K16Ac (Scher) SIRT H3K56Ac SIRT I HST2 - - C. albicans 331 1-331 331 (Hnisz) SIRT I CobB - - E. coli (K12) 242 1-242 242 (Landry) SIRT I HST2 - - S. cerevisiae 357 8-298 291 (Wilson) SIRT III SIRT5 H4K8Ac - H. sapiens 310 37-310 274 41-309: H4K16Ac (Gertz) SIRT SIRT III Sir2A - - P. falciparum 273 1-273 (Zhu) 273 19-273: SIRT SIRT IV SIRT6 H3K9Ac - H. sapiens 355 1-289 289 35-274: H3K56Ac (Tennen) SIRT [00121] Accordingly, the repressor domains of the present invention may be selected from histone methyltransferases (HMTs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitors, as well as HDAC and HMT recruiting proteins. [00122] The HDAC domain may be any of those in the table above, namely: HDAC8, RPD3, MesoLo4, HDAC11, HDT1, SIRT3, HST2, CobB, HST2, SIRT5, Sir2A, or SIRT6. [00123] In some embodiments, the functional domain may be a HDAC Recruiter Effector Domain. Preferred examples include those in the Table below, namely MeCP2, MBD2b, Sin3a, NcoR, SALL1, RCOR1. NcoR is exemplified in the present Examples and, although preferred, it is envisaged that others in the class will also be useful. [00124] Table of HDAC Recruiter Effector Domains Subtype/ Name Substrate Modification Organism Full Selected Final Catalytic Complex (if (if known) size truncation size domain known) (aa) (aa) (aa) Sin3a MeCP2 - - R. norvegicus 492 207-492 286 (Nan) Sin3a MBD2b - - H. sapiens 262 45-262 218 I , (Boeke) Sin3a Sin3a - - H. sapiens 1273 524-851 328 627-829: (Laherty) HDAC1 interaction NcoR NcoR - - H. sapiens 2440 420-488 69 (Zhang) NuRD SALL1 - - M. muscu/us 1322 1-93 93 I_ I I I I _ (Lauberth) CoREST RCOR1 - - H. sapiens 482 81-300 (Gu, 220 Ouyang) [00125] In some embodiments, the functional domain may be a Methyltransferase (HMT) Effector Domain. Preferred examples include those in the Table below, namely NUE, vSET, EHMT2/G9A, SUV39H1, dim-5, KYP, SUVR4, SET4, SET1, SETD8, and TgSET8. NUE is exemplified in the present Examples and, although preferred, it is envisaged that others in the class will also be useful. [00126] Table of Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Effector Domains Subtype/ Name Substrate (if Modification (if Organis Full Selected Final Catalytic Complex known) known) m size truncation size domain (aa) (aa) (aa) SET NUE H2B, H3, H4 - C. 219 1-219 219 trachom (Pennini) atis SET vSET - H3K27me3 P. 119 1-119 119 4-112: bursaria (Mujtaba) SET2 chlorella virus SUV39 EHMT H1.4K2, H3K9mel/2, M. 1263 969-1263 295 1025-1233: family 2/G9A H3K9, H3K27 HlK25mel musculu (Tachibana) preSET, s SET, postSET SUV39 SUV3 - H3K9me2/3 H. 412 79-412 334 172-412: 9H1 sapIens (Snowden) preSET, SET, postSET Suvar3-9 dim-5 - H3K9me3 N. 331 1-331 331 77-331: crassa (Rathert) preSET, SET, postSET Suvar3-9 KYP - H3K9me1/2 A. 624 335-601 267 (SUVH thaliana (Jacks subfamily) on) Suvar3-9 SUVR H3K9me1 H3K9me2/3 A. 492 180-492 313 192-462: (SUVR 4 thaliana (Thors preSET, subfamily) tense SET, n) postSET Suvar4-20 SET4 - H4K20me3 C. 288 1-288 (Vielle) 288 elegans SET8 SET1 - H4K20mel C. 242 1-242 (Vielle) 242 _________ ___________ elegans SET8 SETD - H4K20mel H. 393 185-393 209 256-382: 8 sapiens (Cout SET ure) SET8 TgSE - H4K20me1/2/3 T. gondii 1893 1590-1893 304 1749-1884: T8 (Sautel) SET [00127] In some embodiments, the functional domain may be a Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Recruiter Effector Domain. Preferred examples include those in the Table below, namely Hpla, PHF19, and NIPPl. [00128] Table of Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) Recruiter Effector Domains Subtype/ Name Substrate Modification Organism Full Selected Final size Catalytic Complex (if (if known) size truncation (aa) domain known) (aa) (aa) - Hpla - H3K9me3 M. 191 73-191 119 121-179: musculus (Hathaway) chromoshadow - PHF19 - H3K27me3 H. sapiens 580 (1-250) + 335 163-250: GGSG (Ballar6) PHD2 linker + (500-580) - NIPP1 - H3K27me3 H. sapiens 351 1-329 (Jin) 329 310-329: EED [00129] In some embodiment, the functional domain may be Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitor Effector Domain. Preferred examples include SET/TAF-13 listed in the Table below. [00130] Table of Histone Acetyltransferase Inhibitor Effector Domains Subtype/ Name Substrate Modification Organism Full Selected Final Catalytic Complex (if (if known) size truncation size domain known) (aa) (aa) (aa) - SET/TAF- - - M. musculus 289 1-289 289 1P (Cervoni) [00131] It is also preferred to target endogenous (regulatory) control elements (such as enhancers and silencers) in addition to a promoter or promoter-proximal elements. Thus, the invention can also be used to target endogenous control elements (including enhancers and silencers) in addition to targeting of the promoter. These control elements can be located upstream and downstream of the transcriptional start site (TSS), starting from 200bp from the TSS to 100kb away. Targeting of known control elements can be used to activate or repress the gene of interest. In some cases, a single control element can influence the transcription of multiple target genes. Targeting of a single control element could therefore be used to control the transcription of multiple genes simultaneously. [00132] Targeting of putative control elements on the other hand (e.g. by tiling the region of the putative control element as well as 200bp up to 100kB around the element) can be used as a means to verify such elements (by measuring the transcription of the gene of interest) or to detect novel control elements (e.g. by tiling 100kb upstream and downstream of the TSS of the gene of interest). In addition, targeting of putative control elements can be useful in the context of understanding genetic causes of disease. Many mutations and common SNP variants associated with disease phenotypes are located outside coding regions. Targeting of such regions with either the activation or repression systems described herein can be followed by readout of transcription of either a) a set of putative targets (e.g. a set of genes located in closest proximity to the control element) or b) whole-transcriptome readout by e.g. RNAseq or microarray. This would allow for the identification of likely candidate genes involved in the disease phenotype. Such candidate genes could be useful as novel drug targets. [00133] The term "associated with" is used here in respect of how one molecule 'associates' with respect to another, for example between an adaptor protein and a functional domain, or between the CRISPR enzyme and a functional domain. In the case of such protein-protein interactions, this association may be viewed in terms of recognition in the way an antibody recognises an epitope. Alternatively, one protein may be associated with another protein via a fusion of the two, for instance one subunit being fused to another subunit. Fusion typically occurs by addition of the amino acid sequence of one to that of the other, for instance via splicing together of the nucleotide sequences that encode each protein or subunit. Alternatively, this may essentially be viewed as binding between two molecules or direct linkage, such as a fusion protein. In any event, the fusion protein may include a linker between the two subunits of interest (i.e. between the enzyme and the functional domain or between the adaptor protein and the functional domain). Thus, in some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme or adaptor protein is associated with a functional domain by binding thereto. In other embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme or adaptor protein is associated with a functional domain because the two are fused together, optionally via an intermediate linker. [00134] Attachment can be via a linker, e.g., a flexible glycine-serine (GlyGlyGlySer) or (GGGS)3 or a rigid alpha-helical linker such as (Ala(GluAlaAlaAlaLys)Ala). Linkers such as (GGGGS)3 are preferably used herein to separate protein or peptide domains. (GGGGS)3 is preferable because it is a relatively long linker (15 amino acids). The glycine residues are the most flexible and the serine residues enhance the chance that the linker is on the outside of the protein. (GGGGS)6 (GGGGS)9 or (GGGGS)12 may preferably be used as alternatives. Other preferred alternatives are (GGGGS)1, (GGGGS)2, (GGGGS)4, (GGGGS)5, (GGGGS)7, (GGGGS)8, (GGGGS)10, or (GGGGS)11. Alternative linkers are available, but highly flexible linkers are thought to work best to allow for maximum opportunity for the 2 parts of the Cas9 to come together and thus reconstitute Cas9 activity. One alternative is that the NLS of nucleoplasmin can be used as a linker. For example, a linker can also be used between the Cas9 and any functional domain. Again, a (GGGGS)3 linker may be used here (or the 6, 9, or 12 repeat versions therefore) or the NLS of nucleoplasmin can be used as a linker between Cas9 and the functional domain. [00135] In one aspect, the invention provides a method for altering or modifying expression of a gene product. The said method may comprise introducing into a cell containing and expressing a DNA molecule encoding the gene product an engineered, non-naturally occurring CRISPR-Cas system comprising a Cas protein and the present guide RNA. [00136] In general, it will be appreciated that the guide comprise a guide sequence that targets the DNA molecule, so that the guide RNA targets the DNA molecule encoding the gene product and the Cas protein cleaves the DNA molecule encoding the gene product, whereby expression of the gene product is altered; and, wherein the Cas protein and the guide RNA do not naturally occur together. [00137] In general, the invention comprehends the guide RNA comprising a guide sequence fused to a tracr sequence. The invention further comprehends the Cas protein being codon optimized for expression in a Eukaryotic cell. In a preferred embodiment the Eukaryotic cell is a mammalian cell and in a more preferred embodiment the mammalian cell is a human cell. In a further embodiment of the invention, the expression of the gene product is decreased. [00138] In one aspect, the invention provides an engineered, non-naturally occurring CRISPR-Cas system comprising a Cas protein and the present guide RNA that targets a DNA molecule encoding a gene product in a cell, whereby the guide RNA targets the DNA molecule encoding the gene product and the Cas protein cleaves the DNA molecule encoding the gene product, whereby expression of the gene product is altered; and, wherein the Cas protein and the guide RNA do not naturally occur together. [00139] In an embodiment of the invention the Cas protein is a type II CRISPR-Cas protein and in a preferred embodiment the Cas protein is a Cas9 protein. The invention further comprehends the Cas protein being codon optimized for expression in a Eukaryotic cell. In a preferred embodiment the Eukaryotic cell is a mammalian cell and in a more preferred embodiment the mammalian cell is a human cell. In a further embodiment of the invention, the expression of the gene product is decreased. [00140] In another aspect, the invention provides an engineered, non-naturally occurring vector system comprising one or more vectors comprising a first regulatory element operably linked to the present guide RNA that targets a DNA molecule encoding a gene product and a second regulatory element operably linked to a Cas protein. Components (a) and (b) may be located on same or different vectors of the system. The present guide RNA targets the DNA molecule encoding the gene product in a cell and the Cas protein cleaves the DNA molecule encoding the gene product, whereby expression of the gene product is altered; and, wherein the Cas protein and the guide RNA do not naturally occur together. [00141] In some embodiments, the guide further comprises a tracr sequence downstream of a tracr mate sequence. [00142] In some embodiments, component (a) of the above vectors further comprises two or more guide sequences operably linked to the first regulatory element, wherein when expressed, each of the two or more guide sequences direct sequence specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a different target sequence in a eukaryotic cell. [00143] In some embodiments, the system comprises the tracr sequence under the control of a third regulatory element, such as a polymerase III promoter. In some embodiments, the tracr sequence exhibits at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, or 99% of sequence complementarity along the length of the tracr mate sequence when optimally aligned. Determining optimal alignment is within the purview of one of skill in the art. For example, there are publically and commercially available alignment algorithms and programs such as, but not limited to, ClustalW, Smith-Waterman in matlab, Bowtie, Geneious, Biopython and SeqMan. [00144] In some embodiments, guide forms a CRISPR complex with the CRISPR enzyme. The CRISPR complex or polynucleotides encoding it preferably comprise one or more nuclear localization sequences of sufficient strength to drive accumulation of said CRISPR complex in a detectable amount in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell. [00145] In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is a Cas9 enzyme. In some embodiments, the Cas9 enzyme is S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, or S. thermophilus Cas9, and may include mutated Cas9 derived from these organisms. The enzyme may be a Cas9 homolog or ortholog. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is codon-optimized for expression in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme directs cleavage of one or two strands at the location of the target sequence. [00146] In some embodiments, the first regulatory element in the present vectors is a polymerase III promoter. In some embodiments, the second regulatory element in the present vectors is a polymerase II promoter. [00147] In some embodiments, the guide sequence is at least 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25 nucleotides, or between 10-30, or between 15-25, or between 15-20 nucleotides in length. [00148] In general, and throughout this specification, the term "vector" refers to a nucleic acid molecule capable of transporting another nucleic acid to which it has been linked. Vectors include, but are not limited to, nucleic acid molecules that are single-stranded, double-stranded, or partially double-stranded; nucleic acid molecules that comprise one or more free ends, no free ends (e.g. circular); nucleic acid molecules that comprise DNA, RNA, or both; and other varieties of polynucleotides known in the art. One type of vector is a "plasmid," which refers to a circular double stranded DNA loop into which additional DNA segments can be inserted, such as by standard molecular cloning techniques. Another type of vector is a viral vector, wherein virally-derived DNA or RNA sequences are present in the vector for packaging into a virus (e.g. retroviruses, replication defective retroviruses, adenoviruses, replication defective adenoviruses, and adeno-associated viruses). Viral vectors also include polynucleotides carried by a virus for transfection into a host cell. Certain vectors are capable of autonomous replication in a host cell into which they are introduced (e.g. bacterial vectors having a bacterial origin of replication and episomal mammalian vectors). Other vectors (e.g., non-episomal mammalian vectors) are integrated into the genome of a host cell upon introduction into the host cell, and thereby are replicated along with the host genome. Moreover, certain vectors are capable of directing the expression of genes to which they are operatively-linked. Such vectors are referred to herein as "expression vectors." Common expression vectors of utility in recombinant DNA techniques are often in the form of plasmids. [00149] Recombinant expression vectors can comprise a nucleic acid of the invention in a form suitable for expression of the nucleic acid in a host cell, which means that the recombinant expression vectors include one or more regulatory elements, which may be selected on the basis of the host cells to be used for expression, that is operatively-linked to the nucleic acid sequence to be expressed. Within a recombinant expression vector, "operably linked" is intended to mean that the nucleotide sequence of interest is linked to the regulatory element(s) in a manner that allows for expression of the nucleotide sequence (e.g. in an in vitro transcription/translation system or in a host cell when the vector is introduced into the host cell). [00150] The term "regulatory element" is intended to include promoters, enhancers, internal ribosomal entry sites (IRES), and other expression control elements (e.g. transcription termination signals, such as polyadenylation signals and poly-U sequences). Such regulatory elements are described, for example, in Goeddel, GENE EXPRESSION TECHNOLOGY: METHODS IN ENZYMOLOGY 185, Academic Press, San Diego, Calif. (1990). Regulatory elements include those that direct constitutive expression of a nucleotide sequence in many types of host cell and those that direct expression of the nucleotide sequence only in certain host cells (e.g., tissue-specific regulatory sequences). A tissue-specific promoter may direct expression primarily in a desired tissue of interest, such as muscle, neuron, bone, skin, blood, specific organs (e.g. liver, pancreas), or particular cell types (e.g. lymphocytes). Regulatory elements may also direct expression in a temporal-dependent manner, such as in a cell-cycle dependent or developmental stage-dependent manner, which may or may not also be tissue or cell-type specific. In some embodiments, a vector comprises one or more pol III promoter (e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or more pol I promoters), one or more pol II promoters (e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or more pol II promoters), one or more pol I promoters (e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or more pol I promoters), or combinations thereof. Examples of pol III promoters include, but are not limited to, U6 and H1 promoters. Examples of pol II promoters include, but are not limited to, the retroviral Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) LTR promoter (optionally with the RSV enhancer), the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter (optionally with the CMV enhancer) [see, e.g., Boshart et al, Cell, 41:521-530 (1985)], the SV40 promoter, the dihydrofolate reductase promoter, the -actin promoter, the phosphoglycerol kinase (PGK) promoter, and the EFla promoter. Also encompassed by the term "regulatory element" are enhancer elements, such as WPRE; CMV enhancers; the R-U5' segment in LTR of HTLV-I (Mol. Cell. Biol., Vol. 8(1), p. 466-472, 1988); SV40 enhancer; and the intron sequence between exons 2 and 3 of rabbit p-globin (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA., Vol. 78(3), p. 1527-31, 1981). It will be appreciated by those skilled in the art that the design of the expression vector can depend on such factors as the choice of the host cell to be transformed, the level of expression desired, etc. A vector can be introduced into host cells to thereby produce transcripts, proteins, or peptides, including fusion proteins or peptides, encoded by nucleic acids as described herein (e.g., clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) transcripts, proteins, enzymes, mutant forms thereof, fusion proteins thereof, etc.). [00151] In one aspect, the invention encompasses embodiments wherein an engineered short, bi-directional U6 promoter (a minimal bi-directional promoter) rationally designed from taking the transcription factor binding sites and elements from human U6 promoter is used to drive two transcripts going in opposite directions: In a preferred embodiment, such a bidirectional U6 promoter is incorporated into the SaCas9 AAV vector to deliver 2 Sa sgRNAs. Further aspects of the invention incorporate embodiments as described in PCT/US2014/041800 titled "DELIVERY, ENGINEERING AND OPTIMIZATION OF TANDEM GUIDE SYSTEMS, METHODS AND COMPOSITIONS FOR SEQUENCE MANIPULATION" filed on June 10, 2014 and its priority documents, the contents of which are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety. Further aspects also incorporate features as described in Ran et al. "Double nicking by RNA-guided CRISPR Cas9 for enhanced genome editing specificity." Cell. 2013 Sep 12;154(6):1380-9, the contents of which are also incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. [00152] Advantageous vectors include lentiviruses and adeno-associated viruses, and types of such vectors can also be selected for targeting particular types of cells. [00153] In one aspect, the invention provides a eukaryotic host cell. The host cell may comprise (a) a first regulatory element operably linked to a tracr mate sequence and one or more insertion sites for inserting one or more of the present guide sequences upstream of the tracr mate sequence, wherein when expressed, the guide sequence directs sequence-specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a target sequence in a eukaryotic cell, wherein the CRISPR complex comprises a CRISPR enzyme complexed with (1) the guide sequence that is hybridized to the target sequence, and (2) the tracr mate sequence that is hybridized to the tracr sequence; and/or (b) a second regulatory element operably linked to an enzyme-coding sequence encoding said CRISPR enzyme comprising a nuclear localization sequence. In some embodiments, the host cell comprises components (a) and (b). In some embodiments, component (a), component (b), or components (a) and (b) are stably integrated into a genome of the host eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, component (a) further comprises the tracr sequence downstream of the tracr mate sequence under the control of the first regulatory element. In some embodiments, component (a) further comprises two or more guide sequences operably linked to the first regulatory element, wherein when expressed, each of the two or more guide sequences direct sequence specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a different target sequence in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the eukaryotic host cell further comprises a third regulatory element, such as a polymerase III promoter, operably linked to said tracr sequence. In some embodiments, the tracr sequence exhibits at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, or 99% of sequence complementarity along the length of the tracr mate sequence when optimally aligned. The enzyme may be a Cas9 homolog or ortholog. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is codon-optimized for expression in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme directs cleavage of one or two strands at the location of the target sequence. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme lacks DNA strand cleavage activity. In some embodiments, the first regulatory element is a polymerase III promoter. In some embodiments, the second regulatory element is a polymerase II promoter. In some embodiments, the guide sequence is at least 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25 nucleotides, or between 10-30, or between 15-25, or between 15 20 nucleotides in length. In an aspect, the invention provides a non-human eukaryotic organism; preferably a multicellular eukaryotic organism, comprising a eukaryotic host cell according to any of the described embodiments. In other aspects, the invention provides a eukaryotic organism; preferably a multicellular eukaryotic organism, comprising a eukaryotic host cell according to any of the described embodiments. The organism in some embodiments of these aspects may be an animal; for example a mammal. Also, the organism may be an arthropod such as an insect. The organism also may be a plant. Further, the organism may be a fungus. [00154] With respect to use of the CRISPR-Cas system in plants, mention is made of the University of Arizona website "CRISPR-PLANT" (http:/www~genomarzn.edu/cri) (supported by Penn State and AGI). Emodiments of the invention can be used in genome editing in plants or where RNAi or similar genome editing techniques have been used previously; see, e.g., Nekrasov, "Plant genome editing made easy: targeted mutagenesis in model and crop plants using the CRISPR/Cas system," Plant Methods 2013, 9:39 (doi:10.1186/1746-4811-9-39); Brooks, "Efficient gene editing in tomato in the first generation using the CRISPR/Cas9 system," Plant Physiology September 2014 pp 114.247577; Shan, "Targeted genome modification of crop plants using a CRISPR-Cas system," Nature Biotechnology 31, 686-688 (2013); Feng, "Efficient genome editing in plants using a CRISPR/Cas system," Cell Research (2013) 23:1229-1232. doi:10.1038/cr.2013.114; published online 20 August 2013; Xie, "RNA-guided genome editing in plants using a CRISPR-Cas system," Mol Plant. 2013 Nov;6(6):1975-83. doi: 10.1093/mp/sstll9. Epub 2013 Aug 17; Xu, "Gene targeting using the Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated CRISPR-Cas system in rice," Rice 2014, 7:5 (2014), each of which is incorporated by reference herein including as to how herein embodiments may be used as to plants. [00155] In one aspect, the invention provides a kit comprising one or more of the components described herein. In some embodiments, the kit comprises a vector system and instructions for using the kit. In some embodiments, the vector system comprises (a) a first regulatory element operably linked to a tracr mate sequence and one or more insertion sites for inserting one or more guide sequences upstream of the tracr mate sequence, wherein when expressed, the guide sequence directs sequence-specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a target sequence in a eukaryotic cell, wherein the CRISPR complex comprises a CRISPR enzyme complexed with (1) the guide sequence that is hybridized to the target sequence, and (2) the tracr mate sequence that is hybridized to the tracr sequence; and/or (b) a second regulatory element operably linked to an enzyme-coding sequence encoding said CRISPR enzyme comprising a nuclear localization sequence. In some embodiments, the kit comprises components (a) and (b) located on the same or different vectors of the system. In some embodiments, component (a) further comprises the tracr sequence downstream of the tracr mate sequence under the control of the first regulatory element. In some embodiments, component (a) further comprises two or more guide sequences operably linked to the first regulatory element, wherein when expressed, each of the two or more guide sequences direct sequence specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a different target sequence in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the system further comprises a third regulatory element, such as a polymerase III promoter, operably linked to said tracr sequence. In some embodiments, the tracr sequence exhibits at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95%, or 99% of sequence complementarity along the length of the tracr mate sequence when optimally aligned. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme comprises one or more nuclear localization sequences of sufficient strength to drive accumulation of said CRISPR enzyme in a detectable amount in the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is a type II CRISPR system enzyme. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is a Cas9 enzyme. In some embodiments, the Cas9 enzyme is S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes or S. thermophilus Cas9 (St Cas9), and may include mutated Cas9 derived from these organisms. The enzyme may be a Cas9 homolog or ortholog. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme is codon-optimized for expression in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme directs cleavage of one or two strands at the location of the target sequence. In some embodiments, the CRISPR enzyme lacks DNA strand cleavage activity. In some embodiments, the first regulatory element is a polymerase III promoter. In some embodiments, the second regulatory element is a polymerase II promoter. In some embodiments, the guide sequence is at least 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25 nucleotides, or between 10-30, or between 15-25, or between 15-20 nucleotides in length. [00156] In one aspect, the invention provides a method of modifying a target polynucleotide in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the method comprises allowing a CRISPR complex to bind to the target polynucleotide to effect cleavage of said target polynucleotide thereby modifying the target polynucleotide, wherein the CRISPR complex comprises a CRISPR enzyme complexed with a guide sequence hybridized to a target sequence within said target polynucleotide, wherein said guide sequence is linked to a tracr mate sequence which in turn hybridizes to a tracr sequence. In some embodiments, said cleavage comprises cleaving one or two strands at the location of the target sequence by said CRISPR enzyme. In some embodiments, said cleavage results in decreased transcription of a target gene. In some embodiments, the method further comprises repairing said cleaved target polynucleotide by homologous recombination with an exogenous template polynucleotide, wherein said repair results in a mutation comprising an insertion, deletion, or substitution of one or more nucleotides of said target polynucleotide. In some embodiments, said mutation results in one or more amino acid changes in a protein expressed from a gene comprising the target sequence. In some embodiments, the method further comprises delivering one or more vectors to said eukaryotic cell, wherein the one or more vectors drive expression of one or more of: the CRISPR enzyme, the guide sequence linked to the tracr mate sequence, and the tracr sequence. In some embodiments, said vectors are delivered to the eukaryotic cell in a subject. In some embodiments, said modifying takes place in said eukaryotic cell in a cell culture. In some embodiments, the method further comprises isolating said eukaryotic cell from a subject prior to said modifying. In some embodiments, the method further comprises returning said eukaryotic cell and/or cells derived therefrom to said subject. [00157] In one aspect, the invention provides a method of modifying expression of a polynucleotide in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the method comprises allowing a CRISPR complex to bind to the polynucleotide such that said binding results in increased or decreased expression of said polynucleotide; wherein the CRISPR complex comprises a CRISPR enzyme complexed with a guide sequence hybridized to a target sequence within said polynucleotide, wherein said guide sequence is linked to a tracr mate sequence which in turn hybridizes to a tracr sequence. In some embodiments, the method further comprises delivering one or more vectors to said eukaryotic cells, wherein the one or more vectors drive expression of one or more of: the CRISPR enzyme, the guide sequence linked to the tracr mate sequence, and the tracr sequence. [00158] In one aspect, the invention provides a method of generating a model eukaryotic cell comprising a mutated disease gene. In some embodiments, a disease gene is any gene associated an increase in the risk of having or developing a disease. In some embodiments, the method comprises (a) introducing one or more vectors into a eukaryotic cell, wherein the one or more vectors drive expression of one or more of: a CRISPR enzyme, a guide sequence linked to a tracr mate sequence, and a tracr sequence; and (b) allowing a CRISPR complex to bind to a target polynucleotide to effect cleavage of the target polynucleotide within said disease gene, wherein the CRISPR complex comprises the CRISPR enzyme complexed with (1) the guide sequence that is hybridized to the target sequence within the target polynucleotide, and (2) the tracr mate sequence that is hybridized to the tracr sequence, thereby generating a model eukaryotic cell comprising a mutated disease gene. In some embodiments, said cleavage comprises cleaving one or two strands at the location of the target sequence by said CRISPR enzyme. In some embodiments, said cleavage results in decreased transcription of a target gene. In some embodiments, the method further comprises repairing said cleaved target polynucleotide by homologous recombination with an exogenous template polynucleotide, wherein said repair results in a mutation comprising an insertion, deletion, or substitution of one or more nucleotides of said target polynucleotide. In some embodiments, said mutation results in one or more amino acid changes in a protein expression from a gene comprising the target sequence. [00159] In one aspect, the invention provides a method for developing a biologically active agent that modulates a cell signaling event associated with a disease gene. In some embodiments, a disease gene is any gene associated an increase in the risk of having or developing a disease. In some embodiments, the method comprises (a) contacting a test compound with a model cell of any one of the described embodiments; and (b) detecting a change in a readout that is indicative of a reduction or an augmentation of a cell signaling event associated with said mutation in said disease gene, thereby developing said biologically active agent that modulates said cell signaling event associated with said disease gene. [00160] In one aspect, the invention provides a recombinant polynucleotide comprising a guide sequence upstream of a tracr mate sequence, wherein the guide sequence when expressed directs sequence-specific binding of a CRISPR complex to a corresponding target sequence present in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the target sequence is a viral sequence present in a eukaryotic cell. In some embodiments, the target sequence is a proto-oncogene or an oncogene. [00161] In one aspect the invention provides for a method of selecting one or more cell(s) by introducing one or more mutations in a gene in the one or more cell (s), the method comprising: introducing one or more vectors into the cell (s), wherein the one or more vectors drive expression of one or more of: a CRISPR enzyme, the present guide (which may comprise of a guide sequence linked to a tracr mate sequence and a tracr sequence), and an editing template; wherein the editing template comprises the one or more mutations that abolish CRISPR enzyme cleavage; allowing homologous recombination of the editing template with the target polynucleotide in the cell(s) to be selected; allowing a CRISPR complex to bind to a target polynucleotide to effect cleavage of the target polynucleotide within said gene, wherein the CRISPR complex comprises the CRISPR enzyme complexed with the present guide in which the guide sequence is hybridized to the target sequence, wherein binding of the CRISPR complex to the target polynucleotide induces cell death, thereby allowing one or more cell(s) in which one or more mutations have been introduced to be selected. In a preferred embodiment, the CRISPR enzyme is Cas9. In another preferred embodiment of the invention the cell to be selected may be a eukaryotic cell. Aspects of the invention allow for selection of specific cells without requiring a selection marker or a two-step process that may include a counter-selection system. [00162] In an aspect, the invention provides a non-naturally occurring or engineered composition comprising a CRISPR-Cas system comprising a Sa sgRNA comprising a guide sequence capable of hybridizing to a target sequence in a genomic locus of interest in a cell wherein architecture of the Sa sgRNA is modified. Aspects of the invention comprehend the following modifications to the +83 SaCas9 sgRNA architecture which may translate to other CRISPR enzymes and other sgRNA architectures. The following parameters may be observed to still retain the enzymatic activity of the CRISPR-Cas system: 1. Addition of sequences to the tetraloop (region (5) of ). 2. Addition of sequences to the stem loop 1 region (regions (7) and (8) of ) wherein the bases in the stem section (region (7) of ) may be changed provided the structure is kept the same. 3. Addition of sequences to the stem loop 2 region (regions (10) and (11) of ) wherein the bases in the stem section (region (10) of ) may be changed provided the structure is kept the same. 4. Addition of sequences to the 3' end of the Sa sgRNA (region (12) of ). 5. The G:C pair (region (1) of ) at position +1 is not changed. 6. The location of the bulge or bulge duplex (region (3) of ) is not changed. [00163] Accordingly, it is an object of the invention not to encompass within the invention any previously known product, process of making the product, or method of using the product such that Applicants reserve the right and hereby disclose a disclaimer of any previously known product, process, or method. It is further noted that the invention does not intend to encompass within the scope of the invention any product, process, or making of the product or method of using the product, which does not meet the written description and enablement requirements of the USPTO (35 U.S.C. 112, first paragraph) or the EPO (Article 83 of the EPC), such that Applicants reserve the right and hereby disclose a disclaimer of any previously described product, process of making the product, or method of using the product. [00164] It is noted that in this disclosure and particularly in the claims and/or paragraphs, terms such as "comprises", "comprised", "comprising" and the like can have the meaning attributed to it in U.S. Patent law; e.g., they can mean "includes", "included", "including", and the like; and that terms such as "consisting essentially of" and "consists essentially of" have the meaning ascribed to them in U.S. Patent law, e.g., they allow for elements not explicitly recited, but exclude elements that are found in the prior art or that affect a basic or novel characteristic of the invention. It may be advantageous in the practice of the invention to be in compliance with Art. 53(c) EPC and Rule 28(b) and (c) EPC. Nothing herein is to be construed as a promise. [00165] These and other embodiments are disclosed or are obvious from and encompassed by, the following Detailed Description. BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS [00166] The novel features of the invention are set forth with particularity in the appended claims. A better understanding of the features and advantages of the present invention will be obtained by reference to the following detailed description that sets forth illustrative embodiments, in which the principles of the invention are utilized, and the accompanying drawings of which: [00167] Figure 1 shows the comparison of the sgRNA:DNA heteroduplex with a canonical A-form RNA duplex with reference to Sp sgRNA. The sgRNA:DNA heteroduplex are superimposed on an A-form RNA duplex based on their phosphorus atoms. The A-form RNA duplex is colored dark gray. Nucleotides 51-97 of the sgRNA are omitted for clarity. A corresponding structure may be determined for Sa sgRNA. [00168] Figure 2 shows predicted RNA folding for Sp sgRNA mutation studies. Changed bases are highlighted in yellow. Corresponding RNA folding patterns for Sa sgRNA mutation studies also predict changes that may be made in a Sa sgRNA of different architectures (as indicated in for a +85 Sa sgRNA architecture). [00169] Figures 3A-B show a tabulation of modifications made at different points or regions in Sp sgRNA architecture. Corresponding modifications at different points or regions of optimized Sa sgRNA architectures that affect CRISPR-Cas complex activity may also be identified (as indicated in for a +85 Sa sgRNA architecture). [00170] Figure 4 shows the full-length (FL, +36) SaCas9 chimeric single guide RNA (sgRNA). The guide sequence (N) is represented up to position -1, whilst the following nucleotide (G) is designated position +1 of the repeat sequence (tracr mate sequence, or sense sequence). The repeat sequence endogenous to the SaCRISPR array is 36 nucleotides in length. The tracr sequence incorporates a portion of sequence which is complementary to the repeat sequence (anti-repeat or antisense sequence). The tracr sequence commences at position +41 and is linked to position +36 of the repeat sequence via the linker sequence GAAA. When transcribed, the sense and antisense portions of the tracr mate and tracr sequences hybridize forming a stemloop structure with the linker GAAA forming the "tetraloop". Sequences in the tracr sequence having regions of complementarity form stemloops 1 and 2 . In the FL sgRNA depicted in Figure 4, stemloop 1 commences at position +81 and stemloop 2 commences at position +98. [00171] Figure 5A, shows the

[TRUNCATED]